# "I am starting from scratch" quick-start guide

We assume you have followed Stacks' [installation instructions](<2.1. Installation instructions.md>).

## 1. Create the base directory structure

On your working directory, create the following base directory structure:
```
|-- environments/
`-- stacks/
```

## 2. Create your first environment

An environment is a unique context where your Terraform stacks will be deployed.

Environments are represented by a subdirectory of `environments/` and their name must conform to this regular expression: `^[a-zA-Z0-9-]{,254}$`.

Let's create your first environment:
```
|-- environments/
|   `-- development/
|       `-- env.tfvars  # must be named "env.tfvars"
`-- stacks/
```

This creates a `development` environment.
The `env.tfvars` file should contain any environment-specific variables to be shared accross stacks deployed in this environment.
Typically these are provider settings like IAM roles to assume, or the bucket where you want this environment's state to be stored.

## 3. Create your first stack

A stack is the collection of a base and its layers.
A stack base is input code that translates to a Terraform root module.
A stack layer is an instance of its stack's base, on the environment it maps to.

Stacks are represented by a subdirectory of `stacks/` and their name must conform to this regular expression: `^[a-zA-Z0-9-]{,254}$`.
A stack's base is stored under its `base/` subdirectory.
A stack's layers are stored under its `layers/` subdirectory.

Let's create your first stack:
```
|-- environments/
|   `-- development/
|       `-- env.tfvars
`-- stacks/
   `-- vpc/
       |-- base/
       |   |-- backend.tf
       |   `-- main.tf           # you can do any code structure you want here
       |-- layers/
       |   `-- development/      # must be named after an existing environment
       |       `-- layer.tfvars  # can be named <anything>.tfvars
       `-- stack.tfvars          # can be named <anything>.tfvars
```

This creates a `vpc` stack, with its base and one layer on the `development` environment we created earlier.
The variables in `stack.tfvars` will be injected in all layers of the stack.
You can override them on a per-layer basis through the `layer.tfvars` file.
You can have multiple `*.tfvars` files.

## 4. Deploy your layer

Now let's deploy your newly created layer:
```shell
cd stacks/vpc/layers/development
stacks terraform apply
```

You'll notice a `stacks.out` directory was created.
This is where the output code is stored for Terraform to consume, feel free to inspect it.
Make sure to exclude `stacks.out` from version control (e.g. in Git add it to `.gitignore`).

## 5. Promote to production

Now that we've validated our base in our `development` environment, let's deploy to production now.

To do that, we'll need a new `production` environment, and a new `production` layer of our `vpc` stack:
```
|-- environments/
|   |-- development/
|   |   `-- env.tfvars
|   `-- production/
|       `-- env.tfvars
`-- stacks/
   `-- vpc/
       |-- base/
       |   |-- backend.tf
       |   `-- main.tf
       |-- layers/
       |   |-- development/
       |   |   `-- layer.tfvars
       |   `-- production/
       |       `-- layer.tfvars
       `-- stack.tfvars
```

Then repeat the deployment process for our `production` layer:
```shell
cd stacks/vpc/layers/production
stacks terraform apply
```

## 6. Deploy another stack

Let's now deploy something on our VPC:
```
|-- environments/
|   |-- development/
|   |   `-- env.tfvars
|   `-- production/
|       `-- env.tfvars
`-- stacks/
   |-- ec2/
   |   |-- base/
   |   |   |-- backend.tf
   |   |   `-- main.tf
   |   |-- layers/
   |   |   |-- development/
   |   |   |   `-- layer.tfvars
   |   |   `-- production/
   |   |       `-- layer.tfvars
   |   `-- stack.tfvars
   `-- vpc/
       |-- base/
       |   |-- backend.tf
       |   `-- main.tf
       |-- layers/
       |   |-- development/
       |   |   `-- layer.tfvars
       |   `-- production/
       |       `-- layer.tfvars
       `-- stack.tfvars
```
And `stacks terraform apply` accordingly.

## 7. Deduplicate code

You've surely realized by now that there are a number of things we're duplicating accross environments, stacks and layers.

For starters, you can remove the need to define `backend.tf` on every stack by moving it to `stacks/`:
```
|-- environments/
`-- stacks/
   |-- backend.tf        # (Step 3) Make it a Jinja template and put it here for all stacks to share.
   |-- ec2/
   |   |-- base/         # (Step 1) Remove backend.tf here.
   |   |   `-- main.tf
   |   |-- layers/
   |   `-- stack.tfvars
   `-- vpc/
       |-- base/         # (Step 2) ...and here.
       |   `-- main.tf
       |-- layers/
       `-- stack.tfvars
```

If you're doing things the Terraform way, I'm sure you're also using a [remote state data source](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/state/remote-state-data) in the `ec2` stack to pull the `vpc_id` output you exported in the `vpc` stack. And I'm confident that has at least a couple hard-coded settings as to where the state is stored and how to access it.
Why do that when you could simply use `{{ output("vpc_id", stack="vpc") }}` wherever you need the VPC ID in your `ec2` stack? The `output` Jinja filter will figure out the value and inject it for you.
Better yet, if you don't even want to define an `output` in your `vpc` stack you can use `{{ resource("aws_vpc.main", stack="vpc")["id"] }}` instead, which will look up the resource by address in the `vpc` stack's state and inject it just like before.

There's surely some other things you're duplicating either between `env.tfvars` or `stack.tfvars` files.
For those, you can create common `*.tfvars` files in `stacks/` too, much like with global `*.tf` Terraform code:
```
|-- environments/
`-- stacks/
   |-- backend.tf
   |-- globals.tfvars  # put common variables here
   |-- ec2/
   `-- vpc/
```

---

Hopefully you're starting to see how Stacks can drastically reduce the amount of code you need to write for Terraform to work.
From templating common code and boilerplate away both globally and per-stack, to cascading variable scopes that allow defining values once without losing the ability to override per-stack or even per-layer, plus some extra goodies like the `variable`, `output` and `resource` Jinja filters that completely remove the need for hard-coded remote state data sources to communicate states together.

Check out the _Reference_ section of these docs for an exhaustive list of Stacks built-in features along with usage examples, plus other features not native to Stacks but that you can build on top of it.
